Mkt 872/dedicated semgrep pro engine doc for java (#1434)
semgrep/semgrep-docs: docs/semgrep-code/java.md

---
slug: java
append_help_link: true
title: Semgrep Pro in Java
hide_title: true
description: Semgrep Pro Engine features for the Java language that can increase true positives and reduce false positives.
tags:
  - Semgrep Code
---

# Semgrep Pro performance in Java

This document explains how Semgrep Pro Engine detects true positives and reduces false positives in Java.

Additionally, it provides several simple rule examples to illustrate the concepts and how you can make use of these Semgrep features when writing your own rules.

:::tip

> The code examples shown here are best viewed in **a separate Semgrep Playground tab** so that you can see the <span style={{backgroundColor: '#b968ff'}}><i class="fa-regular fa-star"></i></span> purple star outline. This star markes which lines contain false positives that are correctly identified and removed by Semgrep Pro Engine.

Author: I think "which" was supposed to be deleted, I'll fix this in the doc directly.

:::

> ## Language features prevent injection through boolean and integer types 

Author: I'll take the first option (with 'that').

Strong typing in Java, combined with its compile-time and runtime checks, reduces the likelihood that an integer or boolean input will be exploited to perform injection-style attacks. Semgrep Pro can reduce false positives by leveraging these checks.

The OSS Engine matches based on patterns, which can result in false positivies (FPs), but the Pro Engine can detect boolean and integer values and mark these as untainted, or safe, eliminating FPs.

### Example: `int-bool-untainted`

<iframe title="int-bool-untainted rule" src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=r6rKR" width="100%" height="432px" frameBorder="0"></iframe>

> **Figure**. `int-bool-untainted`. To view the entire sample code and rule, click **Open in Playground**.

Author: I have to remove all the embedditors in this page, anyway :sob:

* Line 24 is a false positive because the data in the sink is an element of an integer list.
* Line 30 is a false positive because the data in the sink is an element in a set of booleans.
* The Semgrep rule uses the fields `taint_assume_safe_booleans` and `taint_assume_safe_numbers` to tell the engine that these types are safe and not tainted. 

## Semgrep understands the Java standard library and APIs

Java provides a wide array of standard classes and methods across its various libraries. These facilitate programming by offering ready-to-use methods for common tasks. Many of these take string inputs, and return integer or boolean values. Thus, these statements returning integer or boolean values are not considered tainted. Semgrep is able to make that distinction, preventing this type of false positive. 

### Example: `sqli-demo-bool_doesnt_taint`

<iframe title="sqli-demo-bool_doesnt_taint" src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=Kx1AY" width="100%" height="432px" frameBorder="0"></iframe>

**Figure**. `sqli-demo-bool_doesnt_taint`. To view the entire sample code and rule, click **Open in Playground**.

> This demo rule detects SQL injection through a `UserInputGenerator` class. This class's unsanitized user input is passed to `SQLQueryRunner`.

Author: Added

The `metavariable-type` field is available in Semgrep OSS. However, classes in Java are frequently defined across files (interfile), which is beyond the scope of Semgrep OSS's analysis. Use Semgrep Pro to perform cross-file analysis to ensure that Semgrep can detect all class and subclass definitions.

### Example: `detect-pattern-in-subclass`

<iframe title="detect-pattern-in-subclass" src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=nJjjG" width="100%" height="432px" frameBorder="0"></iframe>

**Figure**. `detect-pattern-in-subclass`. To view the entire sample code and rule, click **Open in Playground**.

This demo rule detects patterns in instances of the user-defined parent class `Foo` and its subclasses.

- This example has two true positives: **line 10** and **line 25**.
- The `patterns` array initially defines a `pattern: $CLASS.x`.
    - **Line 17**, `baz.x` fulfills this pattern.
    - However, the `metavariable-type` specifies a `type` of `Foo`.

>     - This specification narrows the match to **line 10** because `Bar` is a subclass of `Foo`, and **line 25**, which is an instance of the Foo object itself.

Author: Yep

## Semgrep supports field and index sensitivity

Field sensitivity means that Semgrep can track taint for each field of an object, independently. Given an object `C` with properties `C.x` and `C.y`, if `C.x` is tainted, then it does **not** automatically mark `C.y` as tainted.

> Similarly, index sensitivity means that Semgrep can track taint for each element of an array, independently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, index sensitivity means that Semgrep can track taint for each element of an array independently.
```

### Example: `unsafe-sql-concatenation-in-method-taint-field-sensitivity`

<iframe title="unsafe-sql-concatenation-in-method-taint-field-sensitivity" src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=OrAwe" width="100%" height="432px" frameBorder="0"></iframe>

> **Figure**. `unsafe-sql-concatenation-in-method-taint-field-sensitivity`. To view the entire sample code and rule, click **Open in Playground**.

Reviewer: Does something like "Figure: `unsafe-sql-concatenation-in-method-taint-field-sensitivity` ..." work?

Author: It's been shortened, fear not.

This demo rule detects that `C.x` is tainted by way of the `injection` variable. It is able to differentiate `C.y` as untained.

> - This example has one true positive: **line 21**, and Semgrep Pro Engine can detect one true negative, **line 24**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This example has one true positive on **line 21** and one true negative on **line 24**.
```

- **Line 15** of the rule tells Semgrep to match for the following pattern:
  ```yaml
  pattern: |
    $X(..., $SRC, ...) { ... }
    focus-metavariable: $SRC
  ```

>   - This matches `private void LoggerTruePositives(String injection)`, specifically the `injection` variable. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - This matches `private void LoggerTruePositives(String injection)`, specifically the `injection` variable in the sampel code. 
```

---
slug: java
append_help_link: true
title: Semgrep Pro in Java
hide_title: true
description: How Semgrep Pro Engine can increase true positives and reduce false positives in the Java language.
tags:
  - tk
---

# Semgrep Pro performance in Java

<!-- False positive reduction in Java through Semgrep Pro -->

This document explains how Semgrep Pro Engine detects true positives and reduces false positives in Java.

Additionally, it provides several simple rule examples to illustrate the concepts and how you can make use of these Semgrep features when writing your own rules.

## Language features prevent injection through boolean and integer types 

Strong typing in Java, combined with its compile-time and runtime checks, reduces the likelihood that an integer or boolean input will be exploited to perform injection-style attacks. Semgrep Pro can reduce false positives by leveraging these checks.

The OSS Engine matches based on patterns, which can result in false positivies (FPs), but the Pro Engine can detect boolean and integer values and mark these as untainted, or safe, eliminating FPs.

### Example: `int-bool-untainted`

> <iframe title="tk" src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=Ab0p8" width="100%" height="432px" frameBorder="0"></iframe>

Reviewer 2: `interfile: true` should be inside `options:`, using it inside `metadata:` is deprecated.

Author: Corrected, thank you.

**Figure**. `int-bool-untainted`. To view the entire sample code and rule, click **Open in Playground**.

This demo rule detects tainted data in `sink`. 

* This example has two true positives: **line 22** and **line 28**.
* Semgrep Pro is able to detect that **line 24 and 30 are false positives**. Semgrep OSS can't catch that distinction.

> * Line 24 is a false positive because the data in the sink is an element of an integer List.

Reviewer 2: typo: List -> list ?

Reviewer 2: You could just say "it's an integer" too.

Author: Choosing to keep this as is, corrected List to list. TY.

> * Line 30 is a false positive because the data in the sink is a set of booleans.

Reviewer 2: ```diff
  is 
+ an element in
  a set of booleans.
```

But you could also just say that "it is a boolean".

* The Semgrep rule uses the fields `taint_assume_safe_booleans` and `taint_assume_safe_numbers` to tell the engine that these types are safe and not tainted. 

> ## Semgrep understands the Java standard library and APIs

Reviewer 2: I'd use a different example than filtering out booleans/integers, otherwise it feels a bit like a duplicate of the previous example. You could e.g. just write a patterns like `(boolean $X)` (perhaps using a more interesting class) and show that Pro knows that `.endWith()` returns a boolean.

Author: I'd rather keep this example because it's less abstract than the others (it tries to show an SQLI injection).

* Lines 14 and 17 are false positives because `input.endsWith("something")` and `input.indexOf('u')` return a boolean and integer respectively. Semgrep Pro is able to understand `endsWith` and `indexOf` Java methods.
* The Semgrep rule uses the fields `taint_assume_safe_booleans` and `taint_assume_safe_numbers` to tell the engine that these types are safe and not tainted. 

## Target code in a parent class and its subclasses

Semgrep supports class inheritance in Java. You can use Semgrep to search across all subclasses. This specificity means that rules can better target your codebase, increasing true positive rates. This is achieved through the `metavariable-type` field, which can accept the name of any user-defined class. 

The `metavariable-type` field is available in Semgrep OSS. However, classes in Java are frequently defined across files (interfile), which is beyond the scope of Semgrep OSS's analysis. Use Semgrep Pro to perform cross-file analysis to ensure that Semgrep can detect all class and subclass definitions.

### Example: `detect-pattern-in-subclass`

> <iframe title="tk" src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=nJjjG" width="100%" height="432px" frameBorder="0"></iframe>

Reviewer 2: I think in Java you can just write `(Foo $CLASS).x

Author: Yes but then it matches because it follows the Java syntax, rather than using the `type` key. I wanted to illustrate the `type` key in this case.

**Figure**. `detect-pattern-in-subclass`. To view the entire sample code and rule, click **Open in Playground**.

This demo rule detects patterns in instances of the user-defined parent class `Foo` and its subclasses.

- This example has two true positives: **line 10** and **line 25**.
- The `patterns` array initially defines a `pattern: $CLASS.x`.
    - **Line 17**, `baz.x` fulfills this pattern.
    - However, the `metavariable-type` specifies a `type` of `Foo`.
    - This specification narrows the match to **line 10** because `Bar` is a subclass of `Foo`, and **line 25**, which is an instance of the Foo object itself.

## Semgrep supports field sensitivity

> todo: Check with SME for explanation of field / index sensitivity specific to Semgrep

Reviewer 2: Field sensitivity means that Semgrep can track taint for each field of an object, independently. In the past, Semgrep could only track whether `c` was tainted or not tainted, but it could not distinguish between `c.x` and `c.y`. If `c.x` got tainted, then `c` itself became tainted, again because Semgrep could not independently track taint for `c.x` and `c.y`. But nowadays  Semgrep can record that `c.x` is tainted whereas `c.y` is safe. Does that answer the question or where you expecting a different kind of explanation?

> <iframe title="tk" src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=4b9KL" width="100%" height="432px" frameBorder="0"></iframe>

Reviewer 2: You could make it more interesting by adding a constructor to `class C`:

```java
class C {
  String x;
  String y;
  C(String x, String y) {
    this.x = x;
    this.y = y;
  }
}
```

then `C c = new C(injection, "safe")`.

Author: I tried with the constructor but it looks like it's catching both lines:
![image](https://github.com/semgrep/semgrep-docs/assets/20766840/656679a5-8653-4bfb-a94b-95f350c3fd54)

As compared to the original:
![image](https://github.com/semgrep/semgrep-docs/assets/20766840/8cb2232a-7fc3-4d00-9f7c-a16afafebb2c)

Author: Fixed with the latest snippet in the commit.
